[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
naga manchetti
and charlie state our headlines today
death violence and chaos in washington
dc
four people die as president trump's
supporters storm america's capital
building
the rioters were trying to stop u.s
lawmakers approving the results of the
presidential election
it's not protest it's insurrection
amid widespread condemnation of the
violence we'll bring you the latest from
washington with the
developments and reaction from
politicians and witnesses
family doctors begin offering the new
oxford astra zenica coveted vaccine as
part of the biggest program of its kind
in
nhs history as millions of households
get to grips with the return of online
schooling we look at the efforts to help
families without the laptops and
computers
they need to learn and i'm looking at
the millions of school meals going to
waste good morning the last minute
decision not to fully reopen
primaries means most meals have been
given away or thrown out a look at what
can be done
and the impact on suppliers and good
morning manchester city are heading back
to wembley they're through to a fourth
league cup final in a row
after beating their city rivals
manchester united
good morning we've got a band of rain
slate and snow moving
out of southern scotland in northern
ireland into northern england and north
wales through the course of the day
ahead of it there's some ice to watch
out for and some freezing fog patches
and behind it for the wintry showers and
the risk of ice too but i'll have more
details
in about 10 minutes
[Music]
good morning it's thursday the 7th of
january our top story four people have
died
in violent clashes at the heart of
america's democracy where congress
had been meeting to approve the results
of the u.s presidential election
donald trump supporters stormed the u.s
congress building
one woman was shot and three other
people had what are described as medical
emergencies
more than 50 people were arrested and 14
police officers
were injured let's go straight to our
washington correspondent deborah deska
who's
inside the capitol building now that'd
be very good morning to you it is a much
calmer scene this morning of course
but this began with a protest and then a
number of people storming the building
tell us more
yeah i was actually uh standing at this
very spot charlie doing a live on
air when we saw policemen coming in and
they said that we needed to
uh move and and shelter away from where
we were we were moved into
a tunnel wasn't quite clear what had was
going on
but then we heard that the capitol
building had been breached
this happened shortly after donald trump
had given a speech in which he
encouraged his supporters to come up
from just outside the white house
up the road here to the capitol
buildings and essentially
and make their protests heard they
certainly did that but not
in a way anyone could have really
predicted or
expected really quite shocking scenes we
saw tear gas employed uh having to be
employed uh in
the capitol buildings this is the seat
of democracy
uh in america we saw demonstrators
jumping on
uh the platforms in the uh uh on the
floor of congress they're a
demonstrator that broke into nancy
pelosi that is the
democratic leader of the house of
representatives putting his feet on her
table taking
pictures there people smashing windows
incredibly
scary scenes really to watch we by that
time had moved to a cafeteria where we
were being
kept along with some other people the
whole building was on lockdown at that
point
and you could hear audible gasps at the
beginning when people saw these scenes
that were happening outside the building
you know we were watching them on tv as
they were taking place
uh as the hours ticked by we
we really were stunned by what was going
on it really has been
quite uh shocking in terms of what's
taken place and
as you said four people have died today
and amongst the images that we're seeing
this morning
there are some images from within the
chamber
which so guns being drawn presumably
by the uh the police inside as the
protesters
are coming into the building and we see
people abseiling climbing down the
inside
of the chamber
yeah i mean there is quite a striking
photo of
two security officers uh holding guns
trying to
stop people breaking into uh the
chambers breaking onto
the floor uh a couple of the women that
i was speaking to when we were watching
what was happening from inside the
cafeteria actually work on the
uh the floor of the house and they were
saying they're not even allowed to touch
those desks they were shocked appalled
and really quite
um hurt actually by the level of
disrespect they
said for this uh seat of democracy in
the united states i spoke to somebody
else who works for a member of the house
of representatives
he said he had to help him take cover
and he
accused donald trump of really attacking
the democracy
of his country well you describe the
very shocking scenes
what happened subsequently was of course
that those people who had been working
there and voting
and going through the democratic process
took cover
but then take us through the events that
unfolded later because
the process has carried on
yeah it was really interesting hearing
the reactions to
what was happening at first donald trump
put out some quite defiant tweets that
were then taken down by twitter
we then had this very uh stern uh
address from joe biden the
president-elect saying
that this was really an attack on on
everything that is american essentially
but you also then started to have
republicans so
everybody from former president george w
bush
to even mike pence and allies like
mike pompeo saying that what had
happened was
outrageous un-american and and should
not have happened at all
so you had this moment when nancy pelosi
she leads the democrats in the in the
house
and again other republicans said
look we are going to get this job done
the the demonstrators or the protesters
rioters as they really were
um had tried to stop us doing our job
and we're not going to have it
mitch mcconnell who is the lead a
senator
uh for the republicans called the
protesters
unhinged and said that they had tried to
essentially subvert
democracy and he wasn't going to have it
and the response that they
have had is to continue with the job in
hand so they
have continued with the process they are
determined to finish the certification
process this evening
um there have been a couple of
objections put forward only one that
we've seen them
break and and discuss uh that had the
requisite
support for that in both chambers we are
hearing just on one agency at the moment
ap
that senators have decided not to uphold
that objection so
it obviously it doesn't hold because you
need both houses to uphold that
you mentioned the comments by donald
trump and that was on his twitter
account
uh that his his accounts now have been
closed down
uh so we haven't heard no comment from
him directly via twitter
but uh has there been any other
statement from the
president
nothing really i i mean the video that
there was a video that was uh taped in
in the white house i think it was where
he uh said that he finally told his
protesters to go home
but also kind of said that this is what
happened and when
kind of repeating the the claims that
we've heard the
incorrect claims claims that there is no
evidence of
about this being a fraudulent election
and kind of
implying that his uh the protesters or
his supporters
were pushed to this that is something
that has been pretty strongly
rebutted by his own party i mean the
republicans own chief of communications
saying
that this is domestic terrorism what
happens so
it's difficult to see where donald trump
goes from here i'm sure it must be very
frustrating for him not being able to
speak directly to his
audience but certainly his party is
making its feelings clear
thank you very much now boris johnson
has joined politicians from around the
world by condemning
the disgraceful scenes of writers in
washington dc
in a tweet the prime minister called for
a peaceful and orderly transfer of power
labour leader kirsten alma described the
violent protests as a
direct attack on democracy scotland's
first minister nicolas sturgeon called
the events
utterly horrifying time now is
nine minutes past six the oxford
astrozenic vaccine is being rolled out
to general practice in england for the
first time today
so far all the jabs have been
administered in hospitals well now the
program is due to be expanded to
hundreds
of community-based sites over the next
few weeks
here's more from our health
correspondent dominic hughes you had
your first vaccine here three weeks ago
yes already more than a million people
have received their first vaccinations
against the coronavirus but the target
of reaching
13 million of the most vulnerable by
mid-february is going to be tough to hit
unlike the fisa vaccine which needs to
be stored at ultra low temperatures
the oxford jab can be kept in regular
fridges that every gp surgery has
it's also much easier to move and so
better suited for use in care homes and
for those who can't leave the house
gps say they're ready to start
administering the jab despite some
frustrations over supply
i just think we need we need some
explanations
why has there been this holed up why are
some practices getting it and others
like mine
not being given the vaccine why doesn't
someone tell us
what is going on in england seven
big vaccination centers are opening over
the next week jabs will become available
in more than
200 gp surgeries in hospitals as well as
through a pilot scheme involving local
pharmacies
amid the grim news of rising infections
the pressures on hospitals and a growing
death toll
this is another ray of hope for the
coming months dominic hughes bbc news
the weekly clap for carers which began
during the first lockdown is to return
tonight
under a new name of clap for heroes it's
aimed at recognizing
carers teachers homeschooling parents
and all
front-line workers the idea of clapping
and banging pots from doorsteps
originally began
as a one-off to support nhs staff three
days
after the uk went into lockdown for the
first time so those images
from back in march which seems like a
very long time it was a long time ago
mind your time is all kind of a bit
warped i think at the moment isn't it
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news